Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
KASPER: Kolmogorov Arnold Networks for Stock Prediction
and Explainable Regimes
Vidhi Oad∗
vidhi.ec25@gmail.com
Vishwakarma Government Engineering College, Ahmedabad, India
Param Pathak∗
param.pathak@fractal.ai
QuantumAI Lab, Fractal Analytics, Mumbai, India
Nouhaila Innan nouhaila.innan@nyu.edu
eBRAIN Lab, Division of Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD), Abu Dhabi, UAE
Center for Quantum and Topological Systems (CQTS), NYUAD Research Institute, NYUAD, Abu Dhabi, UAE
Shalini D shalini.devendrababu@fractal.ai
QuantumAI Lab, Fractal Analytics, Gurugram, India
Muhammad Shafique muhammad.shafique@nyu.edu
eBRAIN Lab, Division of Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD), Abu Dhabi, UAE
Center for Quantum and Topological Systems (CQTS), NYUAD Research Institute, NYUAD, Abu Dhabi, UAE
Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= PD4jGJQtL8
Abstract
Forecasting in financial markets remains a significant challenge due to their nonlinear
and regime-dependent dynamics. Traditional deep learning models, such as long shortterm memory networks and multilayer perceptrons, often struggle to generalize across
shifting market conditions, highlighting the need for a more adaptive and interpretable
approach. To address this, we introduce Kolmogorov–Arnold networks for stock prediction
and explainable regimes (KASPER), a novel framework that integrates regime detection,
sparse spline-based function modeling, and symbolic rule extraction. The framework identifies
hidden market conditions using a Gumbel-Softmax-based mechanism, enabling regimespecific forecasting. For each regime, it employs Kolmogorov–Arnold networks (KANs) with
sparse spline activations to capture intricate price behaviors while maintaining robustness.
Interpretability is achieved through symbolic learning based on Monte Carlo Shapley values,
which extracts human-readable rules tailored to each regime. Applied to real-world financial
time series from Yahoo Finance, the model achieves an R2
score of 0.89, a Sharpe Ratio of
12.02, and a mean squared error as low as 0.0001, outperforming existing methods. This
research establishes a new direction for regime-aware, transparent, and robust forecasting in
financial markets.
1 Introduction
The stock market is a complex, dynamic system influenced by multiple factors, including economic factors,
global events, and investor emotions. Predicting its behavior is a critical challenge with significant impact on
financial decision-making, portfolio management, and risk assessment. However, the volatility, non-stationarity,
and abrupt regime shifts in market behavior make accurate forecasting a challenging task (A & James, 2023).
The key problem we address is the accurate prediction of stock market behavior, particularly during regime
shifts such as transitions between bullish, bearish, and stagnant phases. These shifts are important because
∗These authors contributed equally.
1
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
they represent changes in market dynamics, and failing to adapt to them can lead to substantial financial
losses (Kokare et al., 2022). Traditional models like Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA)
(Ho & Xie, 1998), and Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) (Bauwens et al.,
2006), while effective for stationary data, struggle to capture the nonlinearities and temporal dependencies
inherent in financial time series (Alkhfajee & Al-Sultan, 2024; Crawford & Fratantoni, 2003).
State-of-the-art approaches to stock market prediction can be broadly categorized into statistical models,
Machine Learning (ML) models, and hybrid methods, each with distinct strengths and limitations. Statistical
models, such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and regime-switching models (Yuan & Mitra, 2016),
are interpretable and theoretically grounded but rely on rigid parametric assumptions, fixed transition
probabilities, and Gaussian distributions, which fail to capture the nonlinearities and abrupt regime shifts of
real-world markets (Wątorek et al., 2021), leading to poor performance during volatile periods. ML models,
including Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs), transformers, and Large Language Models (LLMs),
excel at capturing complex patterns and long-term dependencies, with LLMs even incorporating external
textual data for enhanced predictions.
However, their black-box nature limits interpretability (Chen et al., 2023), and they often struggle to adapt
to distinct market regimes, either overfitting to historical patterns or introducing lookahead bias due to poor
temporal alignment (Bhandari et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). Hybrid methods aim to combine the strengths
of both approaches, but they frequently fail to enforce sparsity, leading to overfitting (Islam et al., 2024). In
this context, sparsity enforcement refers to applying L1 regularization (λ∥W∥1) to the model parameters W
to drive many weights to zero, thereby reducing model complexity and mitigating overfitting. Most hybrid
ensemble methods lack such explicit sparsity constraints on their feature-importance weights or ensemble
coefficients. They also lack robust mechanisms for temporal alignment, which can result in data leakage
and inflated performance metrics. More specifically, data leakage occurs when future information enters the
training process, for example, by using future prices for normalization or allowing validation/test windows to
overlap with training periods. This improper temporal separation inflates metrics such as accuracy, Sharpe
ratio, and R2 by allowing the model to learn from information it would not have access to at prediction time,
leading to an overly optimistic assessment of real-world performance. Additionally, they often fail to provide
clear, actionable insights into regime-specific drivers, limiting their practical utility (Haase & Neuenkirch,
2023). These limitations highlight the need for more advanced methods, particularly for modeling stock
market behavior.
To address these challenges, we propose KASPER, a novel framework that uses KANs (Liu et al., 2024b) and
integrates adaptive regime detection with sparse, interpretable feature engineering. Specifically, we enforce
sparsity through L1 regularization on regime-specific forecast weights w
(i)
j
and dynamic feature masking,
ensuring that only the most predictive signals influence each regime. This sparse modeling is implemented
within KANs, which are inspired by the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem (Schmidt-Hieber, 2021),
stating that any multivariate continuous function can be decomposed into a finite sum of univariate functions.
Accordingly, KANs implement this decomposition through learnable spline-based activation functions, enabling
flexible function approximation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the KAN architecture maps raw inputs through
learnable spline-activated units (bottom squares) and then linearly recombines the transformed signals across
successive layers, producing regime-aware predictions (top node). Each activation ϕ(x) is constructed from
B-spline bases defined on a knot grid, i.e., a set of breakpoints {k1, k2, . . . , km} that partition the input
domain into intervals, and is refined across progressively finer grid resolutions. The knot locations control
the spline’s local behavior by determining where basis functions are centered and how ϕ(x) transitions
between polynomial segments as x varies. This grid refinement improves expressive power while preserving
interpretability, allowing KANs to represent high-dimensional mappings with fewer layers.
Our approach uses dynamic spline-based activations (Vecci et al., 1998) to capture nonlinear price dynamics
and adapt to regime shifts through robust percentile-based initialization of spline knots. Specifically,
for each feature dimension, knot positions are initialized based on the effective range of the training
distribution. Mathematically, given a feature vector x ∈ R
n, we first determine the robust boundaries
xmin = quantile(x, pmin) and xmax = quantile(x, pmax), where pmin and pmax are lower and upper percentiles
(e.g., 0.01 and 0.99) chosen to exclude outliers. We then compute knot locations {kg}
G
g=1 on a uniform grid
within these bounds: kg = xmin + (g − 1) xmax−xmin
G−1
, where G is the total number of grid points and g indexes
2
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
̃1,1,1 ̃1,2,1 ̃ ̃1,3,1 1,4,1 ̃1,5,1
ϕ1,1,1 ϕ1,2,1 ϕ1,3,1 ϕ1,4,1 ϕ1,5,1
𝑥1,1 𝑥1,2 𝑥1,3 𝑥1,4 𝑥1,5
̃0,1,1
̃0,2,1
̃0,1,2
̃0,2,2
̃0,1,3
̃0,2,3
̃0,1,4
̃0,2,4
̃0,1,5
̃0,2,5
ϕ0,1,1 ϕ0,1,2 ϕ0,1,3 ϕ0,1,4 ϕ0,1,5 ϕ0,2,1 ϕ0,2,2 ϕ0,2,3 ϕ0,2,4 ϕ0,2,5
𝑥0,1 𝑥0,2
𝑥2,1 Spline Basis Function Approximation
ϕj
(i) = ∑
k
k=1 βj,k
(i) ⋅ Bk
(x,ξ
(i))
KAN uses spline basis functions φ(x)
defined over a knot grid.
To enhance flexibility, we extend the knot
grid from a coarse (G₁) to a finer (G₂)
resolution.
G₁: fewer knots → simpler φ(x)
G₂: more knots → higher expressiveness
KASPER uses regime-specific spline
functions φ(x) with quantile-initialized
knots.
Grid extension enables fine-grained
modeling of non-linear financial patterns
across different market regimes.
Figure 1: KAN architecture with two input features and spline-activated units across layers. Inputs x0,1 and x0,2
connect to spline units ϕ0,i,j that produce transformed features x˜0, i, j, which are selectively routed to hidden nodes
x1, j and aggregated to the output x2,1. Each x˜l,i,j denotes a learned univariate spline transformation applied to
a linearly projected input, supporting interpretable feature-to-node mappings and sparse connectivity. The right
inset illustrates spline basis-function approximation on a knot grid and the effect of grid extension (G1 → G2), where
increased knot resolution improves expressiveness and enables smoother approximations.
the knot. This construction ensures that the spline bases cover the effective support of the distribution
with consistent resolution and improved stability under extreme values. To ensure temporal alignment and
prevent lookahead bias, we employ strict closed-left windows for rolling feature calculations and carefully
shift historical data. To further improve generalization, sparsity is enforced through two complementary
mechanisms. First, we apply L1 regularization to all model parameters, including spline basis coefficients
and forecast weights. Second, we use dynamic masking that selectively zeros out small-magnitude spline
coefficients β
(i)
j,k based on regime-specific thresholds. This dual approach retains only the most significant
weights and basis functions, reducing overfitting. For interpretability, we use Monte Carlo Shapley values
(Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) to quantify the contribution of each feature to regime-specific predictions, enabling
the extraction of actionable rules, such as identifying dominant features like High–Low (HL) in bearish
regimes and Open–Close (OC) in bullish regimes. In particular, HL is defined as HLt = ln 
Ht
Lt

, where Ht
and Lt are the daily high and low prices, and OC is defined as OCt = ln 
Ct
Ot

, where Ot and Ct are the
opening and closing prices. This combination of adaptive modeling, sparsity enforcement, and interpretability
enables regime-specific analysis across diverse market conditions.
The key contributions of this study are as follows:
• A novel Regime-Adaptive Forecasting Layer that makes use of sparsely activated splines to model
distinct market dynamics across regimes. This mitigates the overfitting risk in financial time series
by ensuring sparsity-constrained representations that generalize well.
• An orthogonality constraint within the regime detection network to enforce disentangled representations for different market states. This prevents feature collapse, ensuring each regime retains distinct
and interpretable characteristics.
• For seamless discernibility of the regimes, Contrastive Regularization is used. It helps maximize
inter-regime dissimilarity while maintaining intra-regime coherence, thereby improving the stability
of regime classification and reducing misclassification in volatile market conditions.
3
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
• Utilizing a Monte Carlo Shapley method with temporal weighting to extract interpretable, regimespecific rules. This enhances the model’s transparency by identifying dominant factors influencing
each market regime.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 reviews related work on market regime detection, KANbased financial modeling, and interpretability in finance; Sec. 3 presents the proposed KASPER framework;
Sec. 4 reports the experimental setup and results, including ablation studies and comparisons with baseline
models; finally, Sec. 5 concludes with a summary of the main findings and directions for future work.
2 Background and Related Work
Recent work in financial forecasting includes hybrid deep architectures for price prediction (Liu et al., 2025;
Elhoseny et al., 2025), transformer-based models for capturing long-range temporal dependencies under
volatility (Kabir et al., 2025; Hadizadeh et al., 2025), and reinforcement-learning frameworks for portfolio
decision-making and risk control in non-stationary markets (Yao, 2025; Ye et al., 2020). Consistent with the
scope of KASPER, this section focuses on market regime detection, KAN-based approaches for financial time
series, and explainability/interpretability methods in finance.
2.1 Market Regime Detection
Financial markets transition between distinct regimes, characterized by varying volatility, return distributions,
and risk factors. Early work established regime switching via Markov models (Hamilton, 1989):
rt = µzt + ϵt, ϵt ∼ N (0, σ2
zt
), (1)
P(zt = j | zt−1 = i) = Aij . (2)
where rt is the observed return at time t, zt is the latent regime indicator, and A is a fixed transition matrix.
While interpretable, this approach suffers from static regime centroids and rigid parameters.
Ang and Bekaert (Ang & Bekaert, 2002), showed that modeling asset returns as regime-dependent improves
forecasting and risk management:
rt | zt = k ∼ N (µk, σ2
k
), (3)
with portfolio weights dynamically adjusted according to the inferred regime.
Building on this, Guidolin and Timmermann (Guidolin & Timmermann, 2007) extended the framework using
a multivariate Markov-switching model with four regimes (crash, slow growth, bull, and recovery). Regime
transitions follow:
P(zt = i | zt−1 = j) = Aji, i, j = 1, . . . , k, (4)
where Aji is the transition probability. In their portfolio choice setting, the investor’s dynamic optimization
problem at time tb is formulated as:
J(Wb, rb, zb, θb, πb, tb) = max
ω
Etb
"
W
1−γ
B
1 − γ
#
, (5)
where Wb denotes the investor’s wealth at time tb, rb and zb are the vectors of historical asset returns and
predictor variables, respectively, θb collects all parameters of the regime-switching process, πb is the vector of
filtered regime probabilities at tb, and tb is a discrete decision epoch (rebalancing date) with b = 0, 1, . . . , B −1.
The maximization is performed over the vector of portfolio weights ω allocated to risky assets, and the
objective is the expected utility of terminal wealth WB with relative risk aversion γ, conditional on information
available at tb. Bayesian updating of regime probabilities is performed via:
πb+1(θt) = (π
0
b
(θt)P
φ
t
) ⊙ η(yb+1; θt)
[(π
0
b
(θt)P
φ
t
) ⊙ η(yb+1; θt)]0ιk
. (6)
4
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
The Vector Smooth Transition Autoregressive (VLSTAR) model (Bucci & Ciciretti, 2021) was also an
alternative that used a continuous transition function:
yt = µ0 +
Xp
j=1
φ0,jyt−j + A0xt + Gt(st; γ, c)

µ1 +
Xp
j=1
φ1,jyt−j + A1xt

 + εt, (7)
with the logistic function defined by:
Gt(st; γ, c) = [1 + exp(−γ(st − c))]−1
. (8)
where st triggers regime shifts and γ controls transition smoothness (low γ yields gradual changes; high γ
produces abrupt shifts). This model dynamically captures volatility shifts in market conditions.
2.2 KANs for Finance
KANs are effective in financial modeling, particularly for option pricing and stock prediction. Existing
Finance-Informed Neural Networks (FINNs) for option pricing suffer from poor learning efficiency, high
computational costs, complex training processes, and limited interpretability due to intricate loss functions
requiring larger architectures and extensive training to maintain accuracy. To address these challenges, Liu et
al. (Liu et al., 2024a) proposed an FINN KAFIN, that integrated financial equations into a neural framework.
The Black–Scholes formula (Barles & Soner, 1998), which governed their pricing model can be represented as:
∂C
∂t +
1
2
σ
2S
2 ∂
2C
∂S2
+ rS ∂C
∂S − rC = 0, (9)
where C(S, t) is the price of a financial option, S is the price of the underlying asset, σ is the volatility of the
asset’s returns, and r is the risk-free interest rate. The price function is approximated using:
C(S, t) = X
N
i=1
gi(hi(S), t), (10)
where gi and hi(x) are trainable functions. The model minimizes a loss function incorporating financial
constraints:
L(θ) = λinitLinit + λboundaryLboundary + λfinancialLfinancial. (11)
On the other hand, to enhance stock price prediction, Yao (Yao, 2024), proposed an LSTM-KAN hybrid
model, where LSTM captures temporal dependencies and KAN refines nonlinear patterns. KAN improves
nonlinear mapping via:
f(x) =
2
Xn+1
i=1
gi


Xn
j=1
hij (xj )

 , (12)
where gi and hij are trainable functions the model is trained using. Empirical results showed that KAFIN
enhanced option pricing accuracy, while the LSTM-KAN model significantly reduced stock forecasting errors.
2.3 Explainability and Interpretability in Finance
Explainable AI (XAI) techniques address the transparency challenge in black-box deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) models for portfolio management, where deep NNs provide limited insight into their decision-making.
De-la-Rica-Escudero et al. (de-la Rica-Escudero et al., 2025) noted that many DRL approaches provide
explanations only during training and do not support monitoring the agent’s behavior at trading time; only a
small number of prior studies explicitly considered explainability. They proposed a post hoc Explainable
DRL framework that combines Proximal Policy Optimization with model-agnostic XAI methods (feature
importance, SHAP, and LIME) by saving state–action pairs during training and generating explanations at
inference time. Evaluated on five U.S. technology stocks using daily OHLC data (2015–2018), the framework
highlighted asset-specific variations in OHLC importance and produced instance-level explanations of portfolio
5
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
allocations, with statistical validation of Shapley-value stability (variance below 10−7
, p < 0.01 across 50
repetitions), enabling real-time monitoring of agent decisions during trading.
Interpretability challenges also persist in financial AI systems where complex architectures obscure the
factors driving predictions. Ni et al. (Ni et al., 2025) argued that standard time-series visualization is often
insufficient to reveal the temporal patterns underlying model decisions in financial risk assessment, which can
reduce analyst trust and complicate regulatory compliance. They introduced a contrastive visual analytics
framework that combines entropy-based temporal importance weighting with interactive dimensionality
reduction (t-SNE, UMAP) for multivariate financial time series, enabling direct comparison of normal versus
anomalous patterns and highlighting differences in feature attributions across risk scenarios. Empirical
evaluation on credit risk assessment (5,248 corporate cases) and market volatility prediction reported reduced
analyst decision time and improved agreement and anomaly detection, while maintaining sub-100 ms response
times for interactive exploration.
Despite these advances, important gaps remain. Traditional regime detection methods rely on fixed transition
matrices that require manual specification, while many recent Deep Learning (DL) models apply uniform
processing without adapting to distinct market conditions. Hybrid architectures can achieve strong predictive
accuracy, but they often lack explicit regime-switching mechanisms and provide primarily global explanations
rather than regime-specific interpretability. Our work addresses these gaps by jointly performing regime
detection and forecasting via differentiable Gumbel–Softmax classification, introducing Monte Carlo Shapley
values with temporal weighting for regime-specific interpretability, and enforcing regime-specific sparsity
through orthogonality constraints to mitigate feature collapse.
3 KASPER Framework
Dataset Preparation
Load Yahoo Dataset
Feature Engineering
One-Hot Encoding
Regime-Aware
Splitting
Validation - 15%
Optimize parameters
via gradient-based
learning
Compute total loss
using a regularized loss
function
Update model via
backpropagation and
AdamW optimizer
Testing - 15%
Training - 70%
KAN 1
Regime Detection
Layer
KAN 2
Regime Adaptive
Forecasting Layer
Training
&
Optimization
Evaluation
&
Regime Analysis
Spline Activation
Quantile-normalized
per-feature
Feature Embedding
Stack output to create
embedded features
Embedded features
go through:
(L→BN→G→D)×2
→ L→GS(τ) +
OrthoReg
Regime Classifier
Update Sparsity Mask
Update masks &
compute attention
Regime-specific
forecast
Combine activations
& weight sum
Aggregation &
Connection
Aggregate, refine
Compute MSE, RMSE,
MAE, & Sharpe Ratio
Use Monte Carlo
Shapley Values to
quantify individual
feature contribution
Classify data via
softmax-based regimes
Figure 2: Workflow of the KASPER framework. The pipeline begins with Yahoo dataset preparation, feature
engineering, one-hot encoding, and regime-aware splitting into training (70%), validation (15%), and testing (15%).
KAN-1 performs regime detection using quantile-normalized spline activations, learns embedded features, and assigns
regimes via a Gumbel-Softmax classifier with an orthogonality regularizer. KAN-2 produces regime-adaptive forecasts
by updating a sparsity mask over spline components and computing attention-based aggregation before the final
refinement. Parameters are learned with gradient-based optimization (AdamW) under a regularized composite loss.
Performance is evaluated using MSE, RMSE, MAE, and Sharpe Ratio, while interpretability is provided via Monte
Carlo Shapley value estimation and regime-specific rule extraction.
The proposed KASPER framework is composed of two core stages: regime detection and regime-adaptive
forecasting, as illustrated in Fig. 2 and described in Algorithm 1. The input consists of an n-day window of
financial time series data, structured as a state matrix Φt ∈ R
n×f
, where n denotes the number of historical
6
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
days and f the number of features per day. Each row in Φt captures log-transformed returns and volatility
indicators to stabilize variance and enhance stationarity:
Φt,i =

ln
pt−i+1
pt−i

, ln
f
High
t−i+1
f
High
t−i
!
, ln
f
Low
t−i+1
f
Low
t−i

, ln
f
Open
t−i+1
f
Open
t−i
!
,
ln
Vt−i+1
Vt−i

, HL_spreadt−i
, OC_spreadt−i
, ATRt−i
, volatility_ratiot−i
,
price_velocityt−i
, price_accelerationt−i
, volume_changet−i
, volume_statet−i

,
(13)
where pt−i denotes the closing price and f
High
t−i
and f
Low
t−i denote the high and low prices, respectively, on day
t − i. The engineered features include HL (denoted as HL_spread), OC (denoted as OC_spread), Average
True Range (ATR), volatility ratio, price velocity, price acceleration, volume change, and volume state. These
eight features are selected via SelectKBest with f_regression scoring and form the final input to KASPER;
further details are provided in Sec. 4.1.
Algorithm 1: KASPER
Input: Raw financial dataset D
Output: Trained model, regime-specific rules, performance metrics
// Step 1: Preprocessing and Feature Engineering
1 Load dataset D and forward-fill missing values
2 Extract features: lags, rolling statistics, volatility, volume, momentum, temporal dummies
3 Compute target as: yt =
Ct+1−Ct
Ct
4 Split data into Dtrain, Dval, Dtest
5 Apply feature selection via SelectKBest
6 Standardize features using StandardScaler
// Step 2: Define KASPER Architecture
7 Define Spline Activation for nonlinear mapping
8 Create Regime Detection Layer to estimate soft regime probabilities using Gumbel-Softmax
9 Initialize Regime Adaptive Forecasting Layer with regime-specific basis functions and attention mechanism
10 Combine both layers into KASPER model
// Step 3: Train the Model
11 for epoch = 1 to N do
12 for each batch (xi, yi) ∈ Dtrain do
13 Compute predictions yˆi, regime probabilities pi, embeddings zi
14 Compute loss: L = Lpred + λcLcontrastive + λsLsparse + λoLorthogonal + λbLbalance
15 Backpropagate and update parameters
16 Evaluate on Dval and apply early stopping if needed
// Step 4: Extract Regime-Specific Rules
17 for regime r = 1 to R do
18 Identify samples with highest pr from regime probabilities
19 Compute Shapley value ϕ
(r)
i
for each feature i
20 Select top-3 contributing features as rules for regime r
// Step 5: Evaluate Financial Metrics
21 Apply model to Dtest to compute:
22 Sharpe Ratio, Max Drawdown, Cumulative Returns, Win Rate, Direction Accuracy
3.1 KAN Layer 1: Regime Detection
The regime detection module is designed to uncover latent market regimes using spline-activated KANs. This
layer incorporates four components: spline activation functions, Gumbel-Softmax-based regime classification,
contrastive loss for representation separation, and orthogonality regularization to enforce disentangled
regime-specific embeddings.
7
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
3.1.1 Spline Activation Function
Each input feature is processed through a hybrid spline activation function that captures both linear and
nonlinear trends:
f(x) = L(x) + C(x), (14)
where L(x) and C(x) are the linear and cubic components, respectively. These are defined as:
L(x) =
Nlinear X−1
m=0
tanh(wm) [ReLU(xnorm − km) − ReLU(xnorm − km+1)] , (15)
C(x) =
Ncubic X−1
m=0
σ(vm)x
3
norm, (16)
where wm and vm are trainable parameters, σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function, and xnorm is the input
normalized with respect to the knot sequence {km}. To improve robustness to outliers, we place the knots
{km}
G
m=1 on a uniform grid bounded by empirical percentiles of the input feature x. Specifically, the knots
are computed as km = xmin + (m −1) xmax−xmin
G−1
, where xmin = quantile(x, pmin) and xmax = quantile(x, pmax)
are the lower and upper percentile bounds (e.g., pmin = 0.01 and pmax = 0.99), and G is the grid size.
3.1.2 Differentiable Regime Classification via Gumbel-Softmax
The classification of regime probabilities is achieved through the Gumbel-Softmax function, which provides a
differentiable approximation to categorical sampling. We denote regimes by the index r ∈ {1, . . . , R}, where
R is the total number of regimes (set to 3 in our experiments):
P
(r)
t =
exp (fr(Φt + gr)/τ )
PR
s=1 exp (fs(Φt + gs)/τ )
, (17)
where Φt represents the input feature matrix at time t, fr denotes the spline-transformed activation
corresponding to regime r, gr is the Gumbel noise sampled from Gumbel(0, 1), τ is the temperature parameter,
and R is the total number of regimes.
3.1.3 Contrastive Loss for Regime Separation
To ensure that the latent embeddings corresponding to the same regime remain well clustered, a contrastive
loss is introduced:
Lcontrastive = E

∥zi − zj∥
2
· yij
, (18)
where zi and zj denote the latent embeddings of samples i and j, and yij ∈ {0, 1} is a binary indicator defined
as yij = 1 if samples i and j belong to the same regime and yij = 0 otherwise. Specifically, zi = Φdetect(xi) is
the output of the spline-based regime detection layer for input xi ∈ R
n, before the softmax classification step.
The expectation E is taken over the empirical distribution of the training mini-batch B, with inputs x treated
as random samples from the market data distribution D. This term enforces intra-regime compactness by
minimizing the squared distance between embeddings assigned to the same regime.
3.1.4 Orthogonality Regularization
To enforce distinctiveness across regime-specific transformations, orthogonality is imposed on the regime
weight vectors:
Lorth = ∥WWT − IR∥
2
F , (19)
where W ∈ R
R×F is the global weight matrix formed by vertically stacking the regime-specific row vectors
W
h r for all R regimes, and IR is the R × R identity matrix. Specifically, the r-th row of W is Wr =
w
(r)
1
, w
(r)
2
, . . . , w
(r)
F
i
, where w
(r)
j
is the learnable scalar weight for the j-th feature in regime r, and F is the
total number of features.
8
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
3.2 KAN Layer 2: Regime-Adaptive Forecasting
Following regime identification, forecasting is performed using a second KAN layer with regime-specific
parameterization. This layer employs sparse spline basis functions and is optimized using a composite
objective function incorporating robustness, sparsity, and structural regularization.
3.2.1 Forecasting Model
The predicted return yˆ
(r)
t
for regime r is defined as:
yˆ
(r)
t =
X
F
j=1
w
(r)
j ϕ
(r)
j
(Φt), (20)
where Φt is the feature matrix, ϕ
(r)
j
are spline basis functions and w
(r)
j
are trainable coefficients.
3.2.2 Spline Basis Functions
Each basis function ϕ
(r)
j
is constructed using regime-specific B-splines:
ϕ
(r)
j
(Φt) = X
K
k=1
β
(r)
j,kBk(Φt; ξ
(r)
), (21)
where Bk denotes the k-th B-spline basis function with knots ξ
(r)
, and β
(r)
j,k are spline coefficients learned
from data.
3.2.3 Sparsity Enforcement
To promote interpretability and reduce overfitting, an ℓ1-regularization term is applied:
w
(r)
j ∝ ReLU(|w
(r)
j
| − θ
(r)
), (22)
where θ
(r) denotes a regime-specific sparsity threshold. The sparsity level is adaptively controlled through
validation-based tuning of λ.
3.2.4 Composite Loss Function
The full objective function for training integrates multiple loss components:
L = LHuber + λs
X
p∈Θ
|p| + λcLcontrastive + λoLorth + λbLbalance, (23)
with Θ representing the set of all trainable model parameters, |p| denotes the absolute value (L1 norm) of
each individual parameter p. This composite formulation ensures: (1) robustness to outliers through Huber
loss, (2) regime disentanglement via contrastive loss, (3) model sparsity through L1 regularization, (4) distinct
regime representations via orthogonality constraints, and (5) balanced regime distribution across training
samples.
3.3 Interpretability through Shapley-Based Rule Extraction
To enhance transparency, KASPER employs a Shapley value-based approach to interpret regime-specific
forecasts.
9
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
3.3.1 Shapley Value Estimation
For a given feature j in regime r, its contribution is quantified as:
ϕ
(r)
j =
X
S⊆F \{j}
|S|!(|F| − |S| − 1)!
|F|!
× [f
(r)
(S ∪ {j}) − f
(r)
(S)], (24)
where F denotes the full feature set, and f
(r)
(S) is the regime-r model output with subset S.
3.3.2 Monte Carlo Approximation
To approximate Shapley values efficiently, Monte Carlo sampling is used:
ϕˆ
(r)
j =
1
M
X
M
m=1
[f
(r)
(Sm ∪ {j}) − f
(r)
(Sm)], (25)
where Sm denotes randomly selected feature subsets (coalitions) and M is the number of Monte Carlo samples.
3.3.3 Temporal Weighting Scheme
To emphasize recent market behavior, temporal weighting is applied to the sequence of past Shapley values:
ϕ˜
(r)
j =
X
T
t=1
wtϕ
(r),t
j
, wt =
γ
T −t
PT
t=1 γ
T −t
, (26)
where γ ∈ (0, 1) is the decay factor controlling the emphasis on recent time steps.
3.3.4 Regime-Specific Rule Extraction
For each regime r, the top three most influential features are selected:
Rr =
n
arg max
j∈F


ϕ˜
(r)
j





 j = 1, 2, 3
o
, ∀r ∈ {1, . . . , R}, (27)
resulting in interpretable rules of the form:
Regime r : Xj1 + Xj2 + Xj3 → Yr, (28)
where Xj1
, Xj2
, Xj3
are the dominant features and Yr denotes the forecasted market response under regime r.
4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Experimental Setup
We evaluate KASPER on the Yahoo Finance dataset (ARORA, 2023) for regime-aware stock return forecasting.
The full experimental configuration is summarized in Table 1. To ensure a leakage-free setting, missing
values are forward-filled and all rolling features are computed using strict closed-left windows, so that only
information available up to time t is used to construct the inputs at t.
Under this setup, KASPER is instantiated as a two-layer KAN model with two main components: a
RegimeDetectionLayer, which learns spline-based representations and infers market states via Gumbel–
Softmax classification, and a RegimeAdaptiveForecastingLayer, which produces regime-conditional forecasts.
Orthogonality regularization promotes distinct regime representations, while the contrastive objective increases
inter-regime separability, improving the stability of regime assignments.
Given the emphasis on temporal consistency, we engineer the input features using only historical observations
to capture price dynamics, volatility structure, volume behavior, and regime context, with all rolling
10
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
Table 1: Experimental configuration of KASPER, including dataset details, preprocessing, model architecture, training
setup, and evaluation metrics.
Category Parameter Value/Description
Dataset Source Yahoo Finance Dataset
Time Range 2018–2023
Data
Preprocessing
Splitting Strategy 70%–15%–15% temporal train-val-test split
Feature Engineering 15 engineered features (lags, rolling statistics, volatility, price dynamics)
Feature Selection 8 features via SelectKBest with f_regression
Scaling Method StandardScaler for both features and target
Model
Architecture
Number of Regimes 3
Hidden Dimension 64
Spline Configuration Hybrid linear (3) and cubic (2) splines with quantile-based initialization
Activation Functions SplineActivation and GELU
Training
Parameters
Optimizer AdamW (lr=0.001, weight_decay=1e-5)
Batch Size 32
Loss Function Huber loss with composite regularization
Regularization Weights Contrastive: 0.01, Sparsity: 0.001, Orthogonality: 0.01, Regime Balance: 0.05
Epochs 100 with early stopping (patience=15)
Learning Rate Scheduler ReduceLROnPlateau (factor=0.7, patience=7)
Gradient Clipping 0.5
Evaluation
Metrics
Statistical R, MAE, R2
Financial Sharpe Ratio, Direction Accuracy, Max Drawdown, Win Rate, Profit
Factor
computations respecting the closed-left window constraint. The feature set includes HL and OC spreads, kday log-returns r
(k)
t = ln(Ct/Ct−k) for k ∈ {1, 7}, and a 21-day rolling volatility computed on past returns only:
r¯t =
1
w
Pw
i=1 r
(1)
t−i
and σt =
q
1
w
Pw
i=1
r
(1)
t−i − r¯t
2
with w = 21. We further compute the volatility ratio VRt =
σt/(|r¯t|+ε) and the Average True Range ATRt =
1
w
Pw
i=1 max
Ht−i−Lt−i
, |Ht−i−Ct−i−1|, |Lt−i−Ct−i−1|

to capture gap-aware price variability. Price momentum is summarized via velocity Ut = Ct − Ct−1 and
acceleration At = Ut − Ut−1. Volume dynamics are represented using the normalized volume change
∆Volt = (Volt − Volt)/(σVol,t + ε), where Volt =
1
w
Pw
i=1 Volt−i and σVol,t is the standard deviation of
{Volt−i}
w
i=1. We also compute a volume-state ratio to flag unusual trading activity. Finally, regime-context
indicators are computed from rolling summaries of volatility and momentum to reflect broader market
conditions.
The experiments are conducted using PyTorch library for DL model implementation. Key supporting libraries
include NumPy and Pandas for data manipulation, scikit-learn for preprocessing and feature selection;
Matplotlib and Seaborn are used for visualization. The implementation and testing are conducted on a PC
with AMD Ryzen 5 processor, 8 GB RAM, 128 GB SSD storage, and an AMD Radeon graphics card.
4.2 Performance Across Regimes
In Fig. 3, a breakdown of regime distribution patterns in the KASPER model is presented. The bar chart
shows the percentage of samples classified into different market states, with each state defined by three
characteristics, i.e., market direction (bearish, bullish, or neutral), confidence level (high or low), and regime
number (0, 1, or 2). The most striking pattern is the dominance of neutral high-confidence states across all
regimes. Neutral high regime 0 accounts for the largest portion at 18.7% of samples, followed by neutral high
regime 2 at 16.6% and neutral high regime 1 at 13.9%. This demonstrates that the model identifies stable
market conditions where neither bullish nor bearish signals predominate. Among the bearish classifications,
bearish high regime 2 appears most frequently at 9.2%, significantly more common than other bearish states.
This suggests that regime 2 captures bearish patterns that the model can identify with high confidence. The
11
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
①: Low-confidence classifications are rare, indicating the
model's strong decisiveness in assigning regimes.
②: Bullish states are evenly distributed across regimes,
reflecting the model’s consistent detection of upward trends.
③: Bearish states show a distinct concentration in Regime 2,
suggesting that the model captures unique bearish dynamics.
④: High-confidence neutral states dominate all regimes,
highlighting the model’s preference for identifying stable
market conditions.
①
②
③ ④
Figure 3: Regime distribution across market states predicted by KASPER. The bar chart reports the percentage of
samples assigned to each state, defined by market direction (bullish, bearish, neutral), confidence level (high/low),
and regime index (0, 1, 2). High-confidence neutral states dominate, indicating the model frequently identifies stable
market conditions.
consistent distribution of bullish states across regimes, ranging from 6.3% to 7.3% for high confidence, indicates
a similar ability to identify rising prices in all types of markets. Notably, low-confidence classifications rarely
occur across all market directions and regimes, with most falling below 1.5% of samples. This demonstrates
the model’s decisiveness in regime assignments, preferring to make high-confidence classifications.
As shown in Fig. 4, a detailed breakdown of feature contributions is done within each identified regime.
This visualization provides crucial insights into what drives market behavior in different states. In Regime
0, OC_spread dominates at 88.9% contribution, with price_velocity at 3.9%, momentum_state at 3.1%,
and other features contributing minimally. This regime represents a relatively stable market setting where
intraday price movements between open and close are the primary predictive factor. Regime 1 shows a
somewhat different pattern. While OC_spread remains dominant at 83.6%, momentum_state shows increased
importance at 7.0%, followed by HL_spread at 4.9% and price_velocity at 3.2%. This suggests an increased
momentum in the market, because of shifts in sentiment triggered by news events or short-term trader
behavior. Regime 2 exhibits the highest dominance of OC_spread at 89.4%, with price_velocity as the
second most important feature at 5.4%. This shows the market is moving strongly in one direction, with
prices changing faster each day. The reduced importance of range-based indicators (HL_spread at just 1.0%)
suggests that in this regime, direction matters more than volatility range. These feature contribution patterns,
align well with established market behaviors, where trending periods show directional signals and transitional
periods display increased momentum indicators. The clear differentiation between feature importance across
regimes validates our model’s ability to identify meaningful, and distinct market states.
OC_spread is overwhelmingly
dominant, indicating that
overnight open–close
differences are the primary
driver in this stable regime.
OC_spread dominates
once more, but an
increased price_velocity
hints at more dynamic
daily price movements
OC_spread remains highly
influential, with modest
contribution from HL_spread
and price_velocity suggesting
some intraday volatility.
Figure 4: Relative contribution of features across identified market regimes. Each regime exhibits distinct feature importance patterns: Regime 0 shows a balanced influence of directional and volatility indicators, Regime 1 demonstrates
increased momentum significance while maintaining OC_spread dominance, and Regime 2 displays the strongest
OC_spread contribution, with price_velocity as a secondary factor, representing different phases of market behavior,
from consolidation to trending states.
12
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
4.3 Financial Metrics and Risk Analysis
Our evaluation reveals that KASPER delivers exceptional performance across all financial metrics, outperforming existing approaches in both statistical accuracy and practical trading applications. The model
achieves precision with an MSE of 0.0001, an RMSE of 0.0046, and an MAE of 0.0033. The R2 value of
0.8953 ± 0.0030 explains over 89% of the variance in market returns.
A key highlight of KASPER’s performance is its Sharpe Ratio of 12.02. This exceptional risk-adjusted return
is due to three core innovations in our approach; orthogonal regularization which minimizes volatility by
decorrelating regime-specific features, preventing risk factors from affecting each other across regimes. Cubic
spline activations, which boost prediction signals (particularly OC spread, with βOC = 0.25) during stable
periods by using nonlinear patterns that simple models can’t detect. And, contrastive loss, which keeps
different market regimes separated, allowing risk and return to be managed separately (ρij < 0.15). Unlike
transformer models that mix features and cause high variability, KASPER controls volatility and avoids bad
investments during market changes.
①: Std. band widens during volatile regime
transitions.
②: Maximum drawdown point during market
turbulence.
③: Drawdown stabilizes near zero after the
shock.
①
②
③
Figure 5: Drawdown analysis of KASPER model across the testing period. The system maintains exceptional capital
preservation characteristics, with a maximum drawdown limited to -0.09%, demonstrating robust risk management
capabilities. Notable features include widened standard deviation bands during regime transitions (timesteps 40-60)
and rapid recovery periods following temporary losses, reflecting the model’s adaptive response to changing market
conditions.
The drawdown analysis in Fig. 5 highlights KASPER’s effectiveness in managing risk. Throughout the
testing period, the maximum drawdown remains remarkably contained at just -0.09%, nearly two orders of
magnitude lower than traditional approaches. Even during periods of heightened market volatility, as seen at
the point of maximum loss, the model remains stable. Following this challenging period, we observe the loss
reducing by approximately 0.4%, indicating the model’s ability to adapt. The wider standard deviation band
between regimes shows the natural uncertainty during these shifts. This drawdown profile indicates that
KASPER rarely makes consecutive prediction errors in the same direction, limiting potential losses during
tough market movements.
Fig. 6 compares actual versus predicted returns through various market conditions. During stable periods,
the prediction accuracy is exceptional, with errors below 0.5%. Midway through the test period, we observe
a volatility surge where actual uncertainty exceeds predictions with a standard deviation of 0.015. This
corresponds to a market regime transition where historical patterns temporarily lose reliability. The sudden
down-spike represents a bearish signal triggered by unexpected negative market news, an outlier event that no
model could reasonably predict. Based on this single held-out test evaluation, the cumulative returns of 2.76%
over the test period, combined with a win rate of 83.17% and a profit factor of 1.53, show that the forecasting
system works very well. For every dollar risked, the strategy generates $1.53 in profits, creating a favorable
risk-reward profile attractive even to conservative investment approaches. KASPER’s regime-aware approach
enables it to navigate different market conditions with appropriate strategies, maintaining profitability while
limiting downside exposure. KASPER bridges the gap between black-box DL and interpretable financial
modeling by adapting to changing market dynamics.
13
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
Volatility Surge: Actual uncertainty
exceeds market prediction (σ = 0.015),
caused by the market regime transition
period, during which historical patterns
become temporarily less reliable.
The sudden down-spike shows a
bearish signal triggered by
unexpected negative market news
that the model couldn’t anticipate.
Figure 6: Comparison of actual versus predicted returns across the testing period. The model demonstrates varying
forecasting precision under different market conditions: exceptional accuracy during stable periods (timesteps 75-100),
increased standard deviation during regime transitions (timesteps 110-130), and limited ability to anticipate extreme
market events as evidenced by the outlier at timestep 27.
4.4 Interpretability via Shapley Values
The Monte Carlo Shapley approach reveals different feature attribution patterns. In Regime 0, OC_spread
(0.016±0.014) and HL_spread (0.011±0.006) exhibit balanced contributions, indicating a market state where
both directional movements and volatility range influence price determination. This suggests a complex
environment requiring multi-factor analysis for accurate forecasting. Regime 1 shows a shift towards directional
dominance, with OC_spread increasing to 0.039±0.017 while HL_spread becomes negligible. The emergence
of volatility_ratio (0.002±0.001) as a secondary factor shows a transitional market entering directional
trends. Regime 2 displays the most distinctive pattern, with OC_spread reaching 0.083±0.021 while ATR
(0.003±0.002) and price_acceleration (0.001±0.001) emerge as secondary factors. These attributions align
with established financial theory while providing quantitative precision for practical application. As the
market moves from calm periods to breakouts and then to strong trends, the model shifts from using balanced
features to focusing more on direction. For traders, this means using different strategies for each phase: a
balanced approach in Regime 0, a focus on direction in Regime 1, and trend-following with size adjustments
in Regime 2. Changes in which features matter most can also act as early warnings for market shifts, helping
manage risk in advance.
4.5 Robustness and Generalization
To analyze KASPER’s generalization capabilities, we conduct multiple walk-forward analyses across different
market conditions. As shown in Table 2, the model demonstrates remarkable stability across evaluation runs,
with consistently low standard deviations in all performance metrics. We report the following evaluation
metrics:
• Sharpe Ratio is a standard measure of risk-adjusted return. It is defined as:
Sharpe Ratio =
µs − r0
σs
, (29)
where µs is the mean of strategy returns, r0 is the risk-free rate, and σs is the standard deviation of
the returns. In our implementation, this is annualized by multiplying by √
T, where T is the number
of trading days per year (252).
• Win Rate denotes the percentage of profitable trades, defined as:
Win Rate =
N+
N
× 100, (30)
where N+ is the number of trades with positive return, and N is the total number of trades.
14
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
• Directional Accuracy evaluates how often the predicted return direction matches the actual market
movement:
DA =
1
N
X
N
t=1
⊮ [sign(ˆyt) = sign(yt)] × 100, (31)
where yˆt is the predicted return at time t, yt is the actual return, and ⊮[·] is the indicator function.
• Cumulative Return measures the compounded growth of the strategy over time:
Cumulative Return =
Y
N
t=1
(1 + rt) − 1, (32)
where rt is the return at time t.
• Maximum Drawdown (MDD) quantifies the largest observed loss from a peak to a trough in the
cumulative return curve:
MDD = min
t

Vt
maxs≤t Vs
− 1

, (33)
where Vt is the cumulative portfolio value at time t.
Table 2: Walk-forward aggregated financial performance of KASPER, reporting directional accuracy, Sharpe ratio,
maximum drawdown, cumulative and average returns, and trade-level statistics (mean ± standard deviation when
applicable).
Metric Value Standard Deviation
Direction Accuracy (%) 80.94% ± 7.27
Sharpe Ratio 11.24 ± 2.78
Max Drawdown (%) -0.10% –
Cumulative Returns (%) 2.66% –
Win Rate (%) 80.94% ± 7.27
Total Trades 700 –
Profitable Trades 566 –
Average Return (%) 0.0069% –
Average Win (%) 0.0102% –
Average Loss (%) -0.0070% –
Profit Factor 1.45 –
These metrics are calculated per walk-forward test window, then averaged across multiple runs (with each
analysis averaged over 5 runs), with their respective standard deviations also recorded to assess statistical
consistency. As shown in Fig. 7, our walk-forward validation confirms that KASPER maintains its predictive
power when faced with regime transitions, preserving both directional accuracy and win rate across the entire
testing period. The model’s returns stay consistent over time, with steady average performance per trade
and minimal losses.
Examining the specific performance patterns, the Sharpe Ratio exhibits a remarkable peak at period 2.0,
reaching approximately 15.0, indicating exceptional risk-adjusted returns where the model generates 15 units
of excess return for every unit of risk taken. This peak coincides with optimal risk control, as evidenced by
the maximum drawdown approaching near-zero levels during the same period, demonstrating nearly perfect
capital preservation. The win rate simultaneously achieves its highest performance at periods 2.0-2.5, reaching
approximately 87%, where nearly 9 out of 10 trades are profitable, indicating that the Gumbel-Softmax-based
regime classification is operating at peak efficiency. While the Sharpe Ratio gradually moderates to around
6.5 by period 4.0, the cumulative returns exhibit a compelling trajectory, initially stabilizing around 1.5%
before demonstrating a sharp recovery and substantial growth to approximately 5.0% by the final period. This
15
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
 Risk-efficiency
peaks at 15.0,
delivering
exceptional return
per volatility unit.
 Performance normalizes to 6.0
as market dynamics shift toward
directional trends.
 Returns hold steady at
1.5% during initial
risk-controlled phase.
 Portfolio growth surges
to 5.0% as trend-capture
mechanisms activate.
 Trading accuracy
reaches 87% during
optimal regime
detection window.
 Success rate maintains
above 79% threshold across
all market conditions.
 Capital protection
achieves near-zero
loss levels during
peak efficiency.
 Downside exposure remains
controlled below -0.10%
despite strategy intensification.
1
2
1
2
Figure 7: Per-period performance of KASPER across key financial metrics over walk-forward validation windows. Each
subplot displays the mean value (solid line) and one standard deviation (shaded area) for Sharpe Ratio, Cumulative
Returns, Win Rate, and Maximum Drawdown.
divergent pattern, characterized by a declining Sharpe ratio alongside rising cumulative returns, highlights
KASPER’s adaptive nature: shifting from a conservative, high-precision approach during periods of market
uncertainty to a more aggressive, trend-following strategy as clearer directional regimes emerged, all while
consistently maintaining win rates above 79% and maximum drawdowns below -0.10% across all periods.
The model’s robustness arises from two key architectural innovations: our quantile-normalized spline initialization strategy, which ensures appropriate boundary handling across diverse feature distributions and
orthogonality regularization (enforcing

WrWT
r − I


2
F minimization), which prevents feature collapse during
training and maintains distinct regime characteristics as market conditions evolve. This enables KASPER to
capture both linear and nonlinear relationships across market conditions without overfitting to past data.
The consistent performance across varying market regimes, combined with the previously discussed financial
metrics, confirms that KASPER delivers reliable performance under diverse conditions, making it suitable for
practical deployment in real-world financial applications.
Robustness checks under realistic trading and temporal validation. To contextualize the unusually
high Sharpe ratio and near-zero drawdown observed in the main experiment, we conduct additional robustness
checks that account for market frictions and stricter temporal validation. Specifically, we run two additional
evaluations. First, we evaluate KASPER under three cost settings reflecting different execution environments:
an optimistic setting with 0.05% transaction costs, 0.02% slippage, and same-day execution; a more typical
retail setting with 0.10% transaction costs, 0.05% slippage, and a one-day execution delay; and a conservative
setting with 0.20% transaction costs, 0.10% slippage, and a one-day delay. Across these scenarios, KASPER
maintains strong risk-adjusted performance (Sharpe = 13.25, 12.71, and 11.81, respectively), with stable win
rates (88.42%–90.53%), indicating that the performance is not an artifact of frictionless backtesting.
Second, to mitigate lookahead bias arising from overlapping rolling-window computations, we perform
purged walk-forward validation with a 7-day purge gap between training and test segments, using the same
trading-cost assumptions as above. Standard walk-forward evaluation yields Sharpe = 9.89 with 80.19%
directional accuracy and 219.56% cumulative returns, while the purged protocol achieves Sharpe = 10.30 with
80.13% directional accuracy and 147.17% cumulative returns. The Sharpe change between the two protocols
is 4.1%, which is below the magnitude typically associated with leakage-driven inflation, supporting that
the reported gains are not driven by temporal information contamination. The consistency of Sharpe ratios
across cost assumptions (11.81–13.25) and the limited sensitivity to purging provide evidence that the strong
performance reflects stable regime-dependent structure rather than overfitting or evaluation artifacts.
Cross-asset generalization. To assess generalization beyond the primary Yahoo Finance evaluation, we
test KASPER on three markets with distinct microstructures: an equity index (S&P 500), a single large-cap
technology stock (AAPL-MAANG), and a commodity series (daily gold prices). Table 3 summarizes the
results. On the S&P 500, KASPER achieves strong performance (R2 = 0.80, Sharpe= 9.50); the reduction
relative to the main setting (R2 = 0.89, Sharpe= 12.02) is consistent with the higher constituent heterogeneity
and the effects of market-cap weighting. On AAPL, performance decreases to R2 = 0.56 and Sharpe= 7.02,
reflecting increased idiosyncratic volatility and firm-specific shocks that are not fully captured by technical
16
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
inputs alone. On gold, performance further degrades (R2 = 0.33, Sharpe= 1.56), highlighting limitations
when transferring an equity-optimized regime formulation to macro-driven and more mean-reverting dynamics.
Nevertheless, Sharpe ratios remain positive across all datasets, suggesting that the regime-aware forecasting
and risk-control components retain practical value across asset classes. These findings motivate asset-specific
feature augmentation, such as macro indicators for commodities and fundamental/event signals for single
stocks, and, where appropriate, regime definitions tailored to mean-reverting versus trending behavior.
Table 3: Cross-asset performance of KASPER on an equity index (S&P 500), a large-cap stock (AAPL/MAANG),
and a commodity series (daily gold prices). Reported metrics include R2
, MAE, Sharpe ratio, maximum drawdown
(Max DD), MSE, and RMSE.
Dataset R2 MAE Sharpe Max DD MSE RMSE
S&P 500 (Kaggle, 2025) 0.80 0.0045 9.50 -0.25% 0.00015 0.0055
AAPL-MAANG (Upadhyay, 2022) 0.56 0.0124 7.02 -3.52% 0.0003 0.0174
Daily Gold Prices (Chodvadiya, 2025) 0.33 0.0082 1.56 -8.54% 0.0001 0.0112
4.6 Ablation Analysis
To assess the role of the two regularizers in regime identification, we ablate orthogonality regularization and
the contrastive loss, disabling each component while keeping the rest of KASPER unchanged. Removing
orthogonality regularization leads to regime collapse: the regime-specific weight matrices become nearly
identical during training and the detector assigns the majority of samples to a single regime.
In contrast, disabling the contrastive loss produces a different failure mode, referred to as regime entanglement.
As shown in Fig. 8, the regime assignments become weakly separated and are dominated by low-confidence
predictions, indicating substantial overlap of regime embeddings in the latent space. Without the contrastive
objective, the model does not form a stable separation between market states, which degrades regime
discrimination and leads to unreliable regime assignments.
 Bullish and bearish states exhibit nearly
identical proportions (23.2% vs 23.7%),
indicating regime entanglement. Without
contrastive regularization, the model fails
to distinguish opposing market directions
and defaults to arbitrary classification.
 Neutral-state dominance (53.2%)
indicates that the model defaults to an
ambiguous classification when directional
patterns cannot be reliably identified.
1
1 2
2
Figure 8: Regime distribution under contrastive-loss ablation, illustrating regime entanglement. The near-identical
bullish and bearish proportions and the dominance of low-confidence assignments indicate weak regime separation.
4.7 Comparative Analysis
We compare KASPER against established and recent forecasting baselines to evaluate predictive accuracy, riskadjusted performance, and interpretability under consistent experimental conditions. To ensure methodological
consistency and completeness, all baselines are implemented and evaluated on the same Yahoo Finance
dataset using identical preprocessing, train–test splits, and normalization, while preserving each method’s
core algorithmic components. Moreover, VLSTAR and AGNES are formulated for binary regime classification
(calm versus volatile) rather than continuous return prediction; since they output regime probabilities instead
17
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
of numerical forecasts, regression-based metrics such as R2
, MAE, MSE, and RMSE are not represented for
these methods and are therefore omitted from the comparative summary.
Table 4: Comparative evaluation of KASPER against established and recent baselines on the Yahoo Finance dataset
using R2
, MAE, Sharpe ratio, Max DD, MSE, and RMSE. Baseline results are reproduced from the cited works.
Model/Framework R2 MAE Sharpe Max DD MSE RMSE
RF + Monte Carlo (Zhao, 2025) 0.78 0.095 0.93 -28.11% 0.015 0.122
Single Layer LSTM (Bhandari et al., 2022) 0.79 0.0072 0.85 -17.46% 0.00085 0.0292
LSTM + KAN (Yao, 2024) 0.48 0.0057 1.97 -12.00% 0.00014 0.0082
AE-LSTM + DRL (Sagiraju & Mogalla, 2022) 0.50 0.010 1.85 -33.00% 0.00017 0.013
VLSTAR (Bucci & Ciciretti, 2021) – – 0.93 – – –
AGNES (Bucci & Ciciretti, 2021) – – 0.82 – – –
PatchTST (Nie et al., 2023) 0.10 0.0082 2.24 -6.68% 0.0001 0.0108
DLinear (Zeng et al., 2023) 0.03 0.0071 3.40 -9.98% 0.0001 0.0103
DQS (Li & Ming, 2023) 0.78 0.0149 3.65 -7.44% 0.000377 0.0194
KASPER (Ours) 0.89 0.0033 12.02 -0.09% 0.0001 0.0046
As shown in table 4, the results indicate that KASPER benefits from coupling regime identification with
sparse and interpretable forecasting: orthogonality-constrained regime separation is paired with Monte Carlo
Shapley-based attribution, enabling regime-specific explanations while maintaining strong predictive accuracy.
We further include two recent forecasting baselines, PatchTST and DLinear. PatchTST achieves R2 = 0.10
with Sharpe = 2.24, which is consistent with transformer-based models being sensitive to data availability
and with the absence of an explicit regime-adaptation mechanism in the baseline formulation. DLinear yields
R2 = 0.03 with Sharpe = 3.40, suggesting limited explanatory power when a single linear decomposition is
applied across heterogeneous market states. By contrast, KASPER explicitly detects the prevailing regime
and applies regime-specific spline transformations, capturing 89% of the return variance (R2 = 0.89), while
its interpretability module provides actionable regime-conditional insights into feature relevance. These
results support that integrating regime-aware modeling with sparse forecasting and attribution yields a more
accurate and informative framework for stock return prediction under changing market conditions.
4.8 Discussion
The comprehensive evaluation of KASPER across multiple dimensions, including regime behavior, financial
performance, interpretability, and robustness, highlights the strength of its architecture in addressing the
challenges of financial forecasting. Unlike static models or black-box NNs, KASPER employs a modular and
transparent design that adapts effectively to evolving market dynamics. The regime segmentation results
demonstrate that the model reliably distinguishes between bullish, bearish, and neutral market states, with a
strong tendency toward confident regime assignments. This decisiveness, combined with feature attribution
analysis, confirms that KASPER identifies meaningful market signals, such as a dominance of directional
indicators in trending phases and a greater emphasis on volatility during periods of transition. Such patterns
align with financial theory and support more targeted forecasting and risk management decisions.
The model’s financial resilience, reflected in its low drawdown and consistent performance across walk-forward
analysis, is enabled by its architectural innovations. The use of orthogonality constraints helps preserve
regime-specific representations, minimizing the risk of overlapping or diluted features across distinct market
conditions. In parallel, spline-based activations enhance the model’s ability to capture fine-grained nonlinear
effects that conventional models often miss. Contrastive learning further reinforces regime separation,
improving generalization over time.
Crucially, KASPER addresses a key need in financial modeling: aligning strong predictive capabilities with
practical deployability. Its interpretability, enabled through Shapley-based feature attribution, completes
the transparency requirements of real-world applications, including those subject to regulatory oversight.
Compared to traditional statistical models, which may fail under regime shifts, or DL models, which often
18
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
lack interpretability, KASPER offers a well-rounded solution that balances accuracy, adaptability, and
explainability.
5 Conclusion
The proposed KASPER framework addresses key challenges in financial market prediction by combining
adaptive regime modeling, sparse spline-based KANs, and Monte Carlo Shapley-based interpretability. Unlike
conventional models, KASPER adapts dynamically to market conditions, improving predictive accuracy
while avoiding overfitting. Evaluation on Yahoo Finance data reveals strong performance, with an R2 of
0.8953, a Sharpe Ratio of 12.02, and an MSE of 0.0001. Low drawdowns and consistent profitability confirm
its practical relevance. Orthogonal regularization and contrastive loss ensure clear regime separation, while
Shapley-based attribution offers transparent insight into key market drivers. KASPER achieves a strong
balance between accuracy and interpretability, making it well-suited for real-world decision-making.
References
Krishnapriya C A and Ajay James. A survey on stock market prediction techniques. In 2023 International
Conference on Power, Instrumentation, Control and Computing (PICC), pp. 1–6, 2023. doi: 10.1109/
PICC57976.2023.10142717.
Zena Kareem Alkhfajee and Ali Yakoob Al-Sultan. Advancements in stock market prediction techniques: A
comprehensive survey. Journal of University of Babylon for Pure and Applied Sciences, pp. 122–143, 2024.
Andrew Ang and Geert Bekaert. International asset allocation with regime shifts. The review of financial
studies, 15(4):1137–1187, 2002.
SURUCHI ARORA. Yahoo finance dataset (2018-2023), 2023. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
suruchiarora/yahoo-finance-dataset-2018-2023.
Guy Barles and Halil Mete Soner. Option pricing with transaction costs and a nonlinear black-scholes
equation. Finance and Stochastics, 2:369–397, 1998.
Luc Bauwens, Sébastien Laurent, and Jeroen VK Rombouts. Multivariate garch models: a survey. Journal
of applied econometrics, 21(1):79–109, 2006.
Hum Nath Bhandari, Binod Rimal, Nawa Raj Pokhrel, Ramchandra Rimal, Keshab R Dahal, and Rajendra KC
Khatri. Predicting stock market index using lstm. Machine Learning with Applications, 9:100320, 2022.
Andrea Bucci and Vito Ciciretti. Market regime detection via realized covariances: A comparison between
unsupervised learning and nonlinear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03667, 2021.
Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Tom Goldstein, Heng Huang, and Tianyi Zhou. Instructzero: Efficient instruction
optimization for black-box large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03082, 2023.
Nisarg Chodvadiya. Daily gold prices dataset, 2025. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
nisargchodavadiya/daily-gold-price-20152021-time-series.
Gordon W Crawford and Michael C Fratantoni. Assessing the forecasting performance of regime-switching,
arima and garch models of house prices. Real Estate Economics, 31(2):223–243, 2003.
Alejandra de-la Rica-Escudero, Eduardo C Garrido-Merchán, and María Coronado-Vaca. Explainable post
hoc portfolio management financial policy of a deep reinforcement learning agent. PloS one, 20(1):e0315528,
2025.
Mohamed Elhoseny, Noura Metawa, Gabor Sztano, and Ibrahim M El-Hasnony. Deep learning-based model
for financial distress prediction. Annals of operations research, 345(2):885–907, 2025.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.
19
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
Massimo Guidolin and Allan Timmermann. Asset allocation under multivariate regime switching. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(11):3503–3544, 2007.
Felix Haase and Matthias Neuenkirch. Predictability of bull and bear markets: A new look at forecasting
stock market regimes (and returns) in the us. International Journal of Forecasting, 39(2):587–605, 2023.
Anita Hadizadeh, Mohammad Jafar Tarokh, and Majid Mirzaee Ghazani. A novel transformer-based dual
attention architecture for the prediction of financial time series. Journal of King Saud University Computer
and Information Sciences, 37(5):72, 2025.
James D Hamilton. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the business
cycle. Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society, pp. 357–384, 1989.
Siu Lau Ho and Min Xie. The use of arima models for reliability forecasting and analysis. Computers &
industrial engineering, 35(1-2):213–216, 1998.
MD Tanvir Islam, Eftekhar Hossain Ayon, Bishnu Padh Ghosh, Salim Chowdhury, Rumana Shahid, Sanjida
Rahman, Mohammad Shafiquzzaman Bhuiyan, Tuan Ngoc Nguyen, et al. Revolutionizing retail: A
hybrid machine learning approach for precision demand forecasting and strategic decision-making in global
commerce. Journal of Computer Science and Technology Studies, 6(1):33–39, 2024.
Md R Kabir, Dipayan Bhadra, Moinul Ridoy, and Mariofanna Milanova. Lstm–transformer-based robust
hybrid deep learning model for financial time series forecasting. Sci, 7(1):7, 2025.
Kaggle. Sp 500 dataset, 2025. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/andrewmvd/sp-500-stocks.
Siddhesh Kokare, Anvit Kamble, Shubham Kurade, and Deepali Patil. Study and analysis of stock market
prediction techniques. In ITM Web of Conferences, volume 44, pp. 03033. EDP Sciences, 2022.
Xuemei Li and Hua Ming. Stock market prediction using reinforcement learning with sentiment analysis.
International Journal on Cybernetics & Informatics (IJCI), 12(1):1, 2023.
Charles Z Liu, Ying Zhang, Lu Qin, and Yongfei Liu. Kolmogorov–arnold finance-informed neural network in
option pricing. Applied Sciences, 14(24):11618, 2024a.
Yuan Liu, Yilong Liu, Ziang Qi, Yao Xiao, and Xiaoyan Guo. Tcnattention-rag: Stock prediction and fraud
detection framework based on financial report analysis. 2025.
Ziming Liu, Yixuan Wang, Sachin Vaidya, Fabian Ruehle, James Halverson, Marin Soljačić, Thomas Y Hou,
and Max Tegmark. Kan: Kolmogorov-arnold networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19756, 2024b.
Chunhe Ni, Kun Qian, Jiang Wu, and Hongbo Wang. Contrastive time-series visualization techniques for
enhancing ai model interpretability in financial risk assessment. 2025.
Yuqi Nie, Nam H Nguyen, Phanwadee Sinthong, and Jayant Kalagnanam. A time series is worth 64
words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Jbdc0vTOcol.
Keerthi Sagiraju and Shashi Mogalla. Deployment of deep reinforcement learning and market sentiment
aware strategies in automated stock market prediction. Int. J. Eng. Trends Technol, 70:43–53, 2022.
Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. The kolmogorov–arnold representation theorem revisited. Neural networks, 137:
119–126, 2021.
Aspersh Upadhyay. Maang stock dataset, 2022. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rajmillioman/
maang-stock-dataset.
Lorenzo Vecci, Francesco Piazza, and Aurelio Uncini. Learning and approximation capabilities of adaptive
spline activation function neural networks. Neural Networks, 11(2):259–270, 1998.
20
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026)
Marcin Wątorek, Jarosław Kwapień, and Stanisław Drożdż. Financial return distributions: Past, present,
and covid-19. Entropy, 23(7):884, 2021.
XiaoXuan Yao. Lstm model enhanced by kolmogorov-arnold network: Improving stock price prediction
accuracy. Trends in Social Sciences and Humanities Research, 2024. doi: 10.61784/tsshr3015.
Yue Yao. Time-series nested reinforcement learning for dynamic risk control in nonlinear financial markets.
Transactions on Computational and Scientific Methods, 5(1), 2025.
Yunan Ye, Hengzhi Pei, Boxin Wang, Pin-Yu Chen, Yada Zhu, Jun Xiao, and Bo Li. Reinforcementlearning based portfolio management with augmented asset movement prediction states, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05780.
Yuan Yuan and Gautam Mitra. Market regime identification using hidden markov models. Available at SSRN
3406068, 2016.
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Are transformers effective for time series forecasting? In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11121–11128, 2023.
Qiuyue Zhang, Chao Qin, Yunfeng Zhang, Fangxun Bao, Caiming Zhang, and Peide Liu. Transformer-based
attention network for stock movement prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 202:117239, 2022.
Hanyi Zhao. Predicting stock prices and optimizing portfolios: A random forest and monte carlo-based
approach using nasdaq-100. In International Workshop on Navigating the Digital Business Frontier for
Sustainable Financial Innovation (ICDEBA 2024), pp. 883–892. Atlantis Press, 2025.
21